  @) Answer these questions. East or . What are meridians? List their features. West, India . Why do we draw latitudes and longitudes? is the best! _ What are parallels? List their features. . How do we number parallels on a globe? . How do we number meridians on a globe? . How can we locate a place on the globe?   . THINK AND ANSWER The Tropic of Cancer passes through India. So, does India lie in the Northern Hemisphere or the Southern Hemisphere? Do and learn   CE) Which parallel passes through the countries given in the box? Find out from your atlas. Then write below. ee Inquiry-based learning SOP EH EO PEO HEHEHE ORO HEHESHEH EERE HEED EDP ES EEHE OPED EERE SE OEMEOR AHL OPEDEE HEH EELS FSH EO FED EOPEO EER KOMEHEOHEO REPL ERED LDH EO EEHEO HEH EO FED EO PL HEED CODED ES HEH EEDILO REDE ODED EOP EO HES COPED EOD EO HOH EODNEY Argentina Australia Canada Ecuador Egypt Finland Indonesia Madagascar Mexico Myanmar Russia Somalia Fa PROP ESHER OPEOROPEO REPL OREO KO PEHHOH EO HEHE DPE OEEHE ORG DEO EEE OREO HED ED REHKOPED HOPED REEL OPEH EOP EOE SPEDE RDP EO KEP LORE PEEREP EOP EO REPAP PEP K OREO LEP ED HOO KODEDEOPEOPOPEODEDREPEOREDL OED EO DRED EED® . Arctic Circle . Tropic of Cancer ere aes a Equator . Tropic of Capricorn @ Match the location to the city. Use your atlas. °° Application of knowledge 17° 38’ N — 78° 49° E a. Pune 18° 51’ N - 73° 85° E b. Jaipur . 25°34 N-9121° 53° E c. Bhopal . 26° 927 N- 75° 77 E d. Hyderabad . 23°15 N-77° 24 E e. Shillong © The Tropic of Cancer passes through eight states of India. Write their names. e* Information gathering; Exploratory learning 

                          NCF Aoi ities 3 Movem ents of§ ik é(kb$:o$s$ aS Subject integration Critical thinking the Earth Conceptual understanding Application of concepts   Solve and write. ee Subject integration — MATHEMATICS i. seconds in an hour a , 5. months in a decade 2. days in a leap year a : 6. hours in July 3. hours in a week a 2 7. minutes in 12 hours 4. days in February, 2025 3 8. seconds in a day TO DO Write two more questions like these. Ask them to your partner. a i o you know that the Earth is ROTATION D moving all the time? It is spinning The movement of the Earth on its axis is on its axis, like a top. At the same time, called rotation. To complete one rotation, it is also moving around the Sun. These the Earth takes nearly 24 hours. We call two movements of the Earth are called this a day. rotation and revolution respectively. The Earth rotates from west to east. DIscUss Why do we not feel the As a result, the Sun rises in the east and movements of the Earth? sets in the west. Days and Nights The rotation of the Earth causes days and nights. At one time, only one-half of the Earth receives light from the Sun. So, as the Earth rotates, the part of the Earth facing the Sun gets all the light. It is day’   Days and nights are due to AXIS the rotation of the Earth. Learning Outcomes » distinguish between rotation and revolution. At tie ond of mis » explain how days and nights are caused and demonstrate it through lesson, the learner an activity. will be able to explain how the Earth's revolution causes seasons.     

    in this half. The part of the Earth not facing the Sun is dark. It is ‘night’ in this half. When the Earth rotates still further, this pattern is reversed. You can understand this by doing an activity. Bring a globe and a torch. Consider the globe as the Earth and the torch as the Sun. Put the globe on a table. Switch off all lights. Now shine the torch on the globe, as shown in the figure. What do you see? Is the whole globe lit or only one-half of it? Now give half-a-turn to the globe. Shine the torch on the globe again. What do you see now? Is the part that was dark earlier now lit? What does this show? It shows that all places have day and night, but at different times. For example, when it is day in India, it is night in the United States. And when it is day there, it is night in India. And all this happens because the Earth is continuously rotating. ee Selected Response questions   ckpoint } lf True, write T. If False, write F. i. The Earth rotates on its axis. 2. We can always feel the Earth moving. 3. The Earth completes one rotation in 24 minutes. 4. Rotation causes days and nights. . The Sun gives light to the Earth. OT       Only one-half of the globe receives light at a particular time. REVOLUTION While rotating on its axis, the Earth is also going around the Sun. It is moving around the Sun in a fixed oval-shaped path, called an orbit. This movement of the Earth is called revolution. To complete one revolution, the Earth takes a little more than 365 days. We call this a year. Seasons The revolution of the Earth causes seasons. [here are four main seasons — summer, autumn, winter and spring. But how do seasons change? Look at the figure on the next page to understand this. Position A both the hemispheres get equal sunlight - spring in the Northern Hemisphere and autumn in the Southern Hemisphere Position B more sunlight in the Northern Hemisphere and less in the Southern Q rocewi> The Earth covers a distance of nearly 940 million km while going around the Sun once. This is more than six times the distance between the Earth and the Sun. 

22   POSITION D (DECEMBER)   POSITION C (SEPTEMBER) S The revolution of the Earth causes seasons. Hemisphere —- summer in the Northern Hemisphere Hemisphere and winter in the Southern Position D more sunlight in the Southern Hemisphere Hemisphere and less in the Northern Position C both the hemispheres get Hemisphere - summer in the Southern equal sunlight - autumn in the Northern Hemisphere and winter in the Northern Hemisphere and spring in the Southern Hemisphere Words to know leap year a year that has 366 days; occurs every fourth year; 2024 was a leap year oval shaped like an egg   ¢ There are two movements of the Earth — rotation and revolution. ¢ The Earth moves on its axis. This movement is called ‘rotation’. One rotation equals 24 hours. Rotation causes days and nights. ¢ The Earth goes around the Sun. This movement is called ‘revolution’. One revolution equals a little more than 365 days. Revolution causes seasons. ¢ Summer, autumn, winter and spring are the four main seasons. 

    OT : re . When the Earth rotates, Tick (/) the correct answers. Rotation is the movement of the Earth a. around the Sun. b. around Planet Mars. The Sun sets in the a. east. a b. west. a Revolution is the movement of the a. on Its axis. ee b. around the other planets. ___ The Earth completes one revolution in a litthe more than a. 365 minutes. ee b. 365 hours. Seasons are caused due to a. revolution. _ b. rotation. a Fill in the blanks. . The Earth rotates from   The path along which the Earth moves around the Sun is called The four main seasons are __ and _ Match the following. autumn in Southern Hemisphere winter in Northern Hemisphere autumn in Northern Hemisphere winter in Southern Hemisphere Earth . The Earth has two movements, which are ______—s—CsCsCsC—CSCSF3r1irtcd   c. on its axis. a d. around the Moon. ___—   c. south. a d. north. a   c. around the Moon. ___ | ; d. around the Sun. ___ : c. 24 hours. — d. 365 days. a | c. natural disasters. ___ d. climate change. ___—     to and are caused. —_—_—_—_—_—_—_—_—_—_—_—«—«—«x<aK—aK—K—«aK«—K—«—«—«—«—«<—«<—X—as_ra! a. spring in Southern Hemisphere b. spring in Northern Hemisphere c. summer in Northern Hemisphere d. summer in Southern Hemisphere — 23 

