    svuuuutdvuuuusueumuenequmnnnrencceeantiddspdapseusacsusauecucnnmnennguennnnnnennnansdncncubgussasaauussusssceseseugunneunmmnnnnnnennnnenng Teele mo See eo Tee eee TT | | catinuwuctanwefanneeeenerannnennenenn}enennnsssansncceanaasepanneeanenennannnnnnneetonmnancananenanastsins fassuunacnansouanananennnanenacsasnenscoSSScy SoS S STS S TTT \ -eccoeureussupnsuniafiusssduscsivencseueenefenncseeesnnncnnasnsstubensidudeuanunannasenungenscunnnnnsenenenanaaa}anssuuunansunscauananepunnncnennnnsnnsneee ecg CSCS S LE TS ee es meee Cs ial | cacucdutiuusssesenefesmmereneusnunnnnnenenfensncneuuacasssasssueefasunauenennnannnnnnnen}usswinenunnceeccastanatussannnanrtsanuannnenngenene eee ee ee SS GE TTS SSS     snowy ; snowy | snowy foggy snowy : snowy Read the clues and write the place. ee Logical deduction; Evidence-based reasoning 1. generally sunny with occasional rain Place ___ 2. it snows here on most days Place ____ 3, strong winds blow; there are occasional storms Place ___— 4. it remains cloudy on most days Place ___— @ Do these refer to ‘weather’ or ‘climate’? Write W or C. — +» Conceptual understanding 1. It is partly cloudy today. — 2. Deserts are very hot. — 3, It was sunny in the morning but then it turned cloudy. — 4. It may rain tomorrow. 5. The polar regions are covered in snow and hence very cold. — 6. Tomorrow might be a cold and foggy day. _ G} In which zone do these countries lie? Find out and write. ee Information gathering _eeweowsduanensenenannnnanecantcs)asisevit iE ARDICRY RE oMN See ERCerEeKeeaennmmenassnerenete TRAST NS IEEATINE © UPS EATER SERS S SOS NS ERGA ORAS . Japan New Zealand Venezuela South Africa Malaysia France Argentina Ethiopia USA  cnonaecenaunpansin asipguas kecugeseasvucacwexsvapencresavunssnnnecesunconssansass ee oledehsn id TCE SECENGHESTUTEYENTL A reNReaNonenaenasserneEs tees tRASPRPESReteAES 1. North Temperate Zone 2. Torrid Zone AG 3. South Temperate Zone   eT ET eT TS + atin nat an alae’ . ee SS ee ee

                                                  The Land of MXIGY features 6 Appreciation of the environment Dense Forests oo Fed. THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC an OF THE CONGO     Many animals live in a forest. Identify the animals given below. “ 2 Write their names. ee Appreciation of the environment       he areas near the Equator remain hot Location and wet all through the year. They The DRC was earlier known as Zaire. have an equatorial type of climate. In this It is located in Central Africa. The lesson you will read about the Democratic Equator passes through the country. Republic of the Congo (DRC). It lies in TO DO In your atlas, open the political the equatorial region and experiences hot map of Africa. Locate the Democratic and wet weather conditions. Republic of the Congo. Learning Outcomes outline the location, size and the neighbouring countries of the DRC. At the end of this lesson, the learner will be able to explain the weather conditions and the flora—fauna of the country. summarize the main economic activities and the lifestyle of the people. vvv iy list the names of a few cities in the country.

48     | REPUBLIC wie -5-- OF TH Gahon | congis = > §S DEM Ai i Se Nadombe > ¥ ae = BS, :   Map 6.1 The Democratic Republic of the Congo and its neighbouring countries The DRC is surrounded by nine countries. ¢ in the north — the Central African Republic, South Sudan ¢ in the east — Uganda, Rwanda, Burundi, Tanzania * in the south — Zambia, Angola ¢ in the west — the Republic of the Congo TO DO Locate these countries on Map 6.1. Size and Population The DRC is the second-largest country in Africa. It has an area of nearly 23.5 lakh sq. km. It is nearly seven times the size of Rajasthan, India’s largest state. The total population is nearly 11.5 crore.                                                                            Land River Congo, the second- longest river in Africa, flows through the DRC. The country lies in the centre of the Congo river basin. The river basin is a low-lying area covered with rainforests. The Rwenzori mountains lie towards the north- east. There are four big lakes in the country - Albert, Edward, Kivu and Tanganyika. They lie along the eastern boundary of ee the country. Weather conditions The country experiences high temperatures and heavy rainfall. It is hot throughout the year. Humidity is also very high. You sweat a lot. Mornings are pleasant with bright sunshine. By noon, it gets very hot. AFRICAN | ELEPHANT   

    ¢€ . Animals found >» FactWise The country is very rich in wildlife. Many The Congo rainforests are thé largest animals are found in the forests here. In in Africa and the second-largest in the fact, many people describe the country as world. The Ituri rainforest is a part of it. a very big natural zoo. Poaching, however, It covers a large part of the DRC. is common and has reduced the number of animals. Look at the pictures of a few The heat is often unbearable. Around late animals found here. afternoon, it becomes cloudy. There is a short burst of heavy showers. Evenings and nights are cool Selected Response questions   Answer these questions. Vegetation The DRC has one of the largest forest reserves in Africa. In hot and humid 1. In which region does the DRC lie? - 2. What was the DRC called earlier? conditions, trees and plants grow very easily and quickly. Different kinds of trees are found in the forests here. As there 3. In which continent does the DRC lie? is no dry season, the trees do not shed their leaves. So, the forests remain green 4. Which important line of latitude throughout the year. They are passes through the DRC? also so dense that it is . fr. difficult to pass Lan 5. Which river flows through the DRC? through them. J. G a\ € 7 BoNoBo |}, —— —————— _ 2 ee ——— = 

  Farming is the main occupation. The DRC is very rich in minerals. The country has large reserves of diamond, gold, cobalt, copper, manganese, uranium and coal. Many people are engaged in mining. However, industries are not well-developed in the country. Hence, most of the minerals mined are exported, particularly to China. Farming is the other major occupation. Large areas under forests have been cleared for farming. Farmers use traditional methods to grow crops. Rice, maize and cassava are the main food crops. Cocoa, coffee, tobacco, cotton and rubber are the main cash crops. Livestock rearing and fishing are the other occupations. Most people belong to the Bantu tribe. They live in villages. They eat what they grow. Cassava is an important part of their diet. It is dried, pounded into flour and then used to make bread. People also catch and eat fish. Many people live in towns and work in the factories located. here. The pygmies have been living in the country for many, many centuries. They are very short in height. Today, most of them live in forests. They have a very primitive lifestyle. They hunt animals and move about in search of food. They live in huts. The country has a poor land transport system. The dense forests have made it difficult to make roads and lay railway Ferries are very common in the country. i a 7 ae. Pe Raa TN RS ie a 

                                                   Kinshasa is a modern city. Its population is nearly 1.8 crore. tracks. Even the roads and railways that Cities are there are not maintained properly. There are many big cities in the country. The country has a network of rivers. Kinshasa is the capital and the largest Hence water transport is the main mode city. It has an international airport. Mbuji- of travel. Most people go from one place Mayi, Kananga and Kisangani are a few to another by boats and ferries. There other cities. Lubumbashi is a mining city, are very few airports in the country. Air located in a mineral-rich region. Nearly transport is not well-developed. 30 per cent of the people live in cities.    Words to know poaching hunting animals where it is not allowed: poachers hunt animals and sell their body parts to get money; poaching is against the law food crops crops grown to be eaten: for example, wheat is a food crop cash crops crops grown to earn a profit; for example, cotton — is a cash crop im hy livestock rearing keeping animals on farms; animals are reared for Pa eggs, milk and meat i primitive very old; something that has not changed for many centuries Gam ferry a large boat that carries passengers and small vehicles alles *   

  52   & ¢ © @ Sd Sd ®      1. Read and answer   The DRC lies in the centre of Africa. It shares its borders with nine countries. River Congo flows through the country. The country has a hot and wet climate. It is covered with dense forests. The country is very rich in wildlife and mineral resources. Mining and farming are the main occupations. Most minerals mined are exported. People grow both food crops and cash crops. Most Congolese are Bantu tribals. Pygmies also live in the country. Their lifestyle is very primitive. Water transport is very popular. Most people travel by boats and ferries. Kinshasa is the capital. Mbuji-Mayi, Lubumbashi, Kananga and Kisangani are the other big cities. LOLOL OI ION SRL OS OO A) Tick (/) the correct answers. The DRC lies in a. northern Africa. ee b. eastern Africa. a a. hot and wet. — b. cold and dry. — The DRC is very rich in a. oil and gas. — b. wildlife and minerals. _ The main occupations of the people a. weaving and gem cutting. —— b. rock carving and fishing. =£—— The capital of the DRC !s a. Kananga. aes b. Kinshasa. — _ Throughout the year, the DRC remains » « Selected Response questions; Constructed Response questions -. western Africa. a d. central Africa. ee c, hot and dry. — d. cold and wet. — c. solar energy. — d. wind energy. — c. mining and farming. sonnei d. pickle-making and hunting. —— c. Kisangani. _ d. Lubumbashi.   

© Write True or False. , 14. Zambia lies to the north of the DRC.   2. The DRC is nearly seven times the size of India. 3. The DRC its characterized by high temperatures and heavy rainfall.   4. The pygmies are the original inhabitants of the DRC. Road and rail transport is well-developed in the DRC. Ol c Circle those that are related to the DRC. wheat Lake Edward okapi petroleum Lake Michigan bonobo high humidity sand dunes River Congo cheetah pygmies Kinshasa cassava dense forests mining camels © Answer these questions. i. List the nine countries with which the DRC share its borders. 2. Write a note on the weather conditions prevalent in the DRC. 3. What crops are cultivated in the DRC?   4. Write a few sentences on the lifestyle of the pygmies. Cassava 5. Write a note on the transport system in the DRC. HOTS 6. THINK AND ANSWER Despite being mineral-rich, why is the DRC poor?     Assertion — Reason question °° Critical thinking; Conceptual understanding | Read the given statements. Write b | if both (A) and (R) are true but (R) is not the correct explanation of (A). i. Assertion (A) The DRC experiences hot and humid weather conditions. | | Reason (R) The DRC has a dense forest cover. LJ | 2. Assertion (A) Cassava is used to make bread and is eaten by alll. —_ Reason (R) Cassava is grown on a large scale. Ld 53 | 

