

                                           les features COREE EER EER HEHEHE EHR HEH HERE EH EEEEEHEST EHH H Rey, ~ 10 The Revolt of 1857 ride and rotedness Subject integration Collaboration Map-based learning   India is known as the ‘Land of Spices’. Name these spices. «« Pride and rootedness in India      1. 2. _ What do you call 3. these spices in your mother tongue? A. 5. 6. 7. | i has always been famous for its British defeated the others and began to spices, textiles, gold, jewellery and control trade in India. pearls. The Arabs were the first to The British traders formed the come to India for trade. Much later, the English East India Company to trade. Portuguese, the Dutch, the French and the The Company bought Indian goods such British traders followed. The Europeans as spices and textiles at low prices and fought amongst themselves to get the sold them in Europe at high prices. This largest share of this trade. In the end, the resulted in huge profits for the Company. elaborate on what attracted the European traders to India. explain how the English East India Company exploited the people. summarize all aspects of the Revolt — causes, spread, nature and results. recall the names of the leaders of the Revolt and where they fought from. Learning Outcomes At the end of this lesson, the learner will be able to vvviyv

  Little by little, the Company became very powerful. It took advantage of the lack of unity among the Indian rulers and conquered large parts of India. Over time, the Company became a ruling body instead of a trading body. Why were the people unhappy? The Company wanted to increase its profit. So, it exploited the people. ¢ The farmers had to pay high taxes. Even when there were floods and droughts, they had to pay taxes. They were also forced to grow certain crops, such as cotton and indigo, and sell them to the Company at low rates. The farmers became poorer and poorer. ¢ The policies of the Company threw the weavers out of work. Mill-made cloth, which was cheaper, was imported into India from England. Due to this, the demand for local, handmade cloth declined. The weavers suffered and became unemployed. They could not even feed their families. ¢ The Indian rulers lost their power and freedom. The Company began to control the running of their kingdoms. ¢ The Indian soldiers (called ‘sepoys’) serving in the Companys army were equally unhappy. They were paid low salaries, denied promotions and were not respected by the British officers. Thus, all sections of society were unhappy. Soon, this unhappiness turned to anger. Then, there was a major revolt.     ee Selected Response questions Match the following. 1. farmers a. faced unfair competition 2. weavers b. lost their power to rule 3. rulers c. were not respected 4. soldiers d. paid high taxes THE GREAT REVOLT Ever since the British came, people had been protesting against their unfair policies. There were many small revolts in various parts of the country. However, it was only in 1857 that a major revolt broke out. The Revolt of 1857 was the first major challenge to the British in India. The immediate cause At this time, a new rifle was introduced in the army. The sepoys had to bite off the greased wrapper of the bullet and then put the bullet in the rifle. Some people believed that the bullets were greased with the fat of cows and pigs. The se poys led the Revolt. ae =   

84   es © > aa Meerut)” > F Bareilly ». v. ¢ cy ~ . ; 1 aire i o LucknoW~.. Se eee Kanpur ® ee ae . @ x . Gwalior A : “= fe gies Jhansi , hanag; 3% ARABIAN | Ky ' SEA , 2 geek BAY OF BENGAL Kare, A (wiGNt) agaMavHsyv On a ° INDIAN \ J/OCEAN ee par sill Gra =:     Map 10.1 The main centres of the Great Revolt The Hindus consider the cow sacred and the Muslims consider the pig unclean. So, for the sepoys, using these bullets was against their religion. ‘They refused to use the new rifles. Mangal Pandey was the first to do so. When the British officers forced the sepoys to use the rifles, they revolted. The start of the Revolt The Revolt started in Meerut on 10 May 1857. The sepoys refused to follow the orders of their British officers. They broke open the prisons and freed the soldiers who had been jailed for refusing to use the rifle. Then the sepoys marched towards Delhi. They reached Delhi the next day. Here, they declared the Mughal emperor, Bahadur Shah Zafar, as their leader. The spread of the Revolt The news of the Revolt soon spread. Sepoys in different parts of northern and central India also revolted. Other sections of the society such as farmers, weavers and craftsmen also joined the sepoys. Different leaders led the Revolt in different areas. ¢ Rani Lakshmi Bai at Jhansi ¢ Nana Sahib and Tantia ‘Tope at Kanpur ¢ Bakht Khan at Delhi ¢ Khan Bahadur Khan at Bareilly ¢ Begum Hazrat Mahal at Lucknow The end of the Revolt The Revolt did not last long. There were many reasons for this. ¢ It did not spread to all parts of India. It was limited in scope. ¢ It was not organized properly. There was no one leader to guide it. ¢ The sepoys were short of money and weapons. The British had modern weapons and were well-organized. After the Revolt The British started punishing the people who had joined the Revolt. They were   The Revolt of 1857 is called by different names. Some call it a Sepoy Mutiny. Others have termed it the Great Revolt or the Great Uprising. Some people call it the First War of Indian Independence. 

                e be This painting shows a battle between the rebel sepoys and the Company’s army.                                           either killed or jailed. A major result was over their territories if they accepted the the end of the rule of the English East _ authority of the British government. India Company in India. Henceforth, The Revolt of 1857 was an important India was to be governed by the event in Indias struggle for freedom. Government of England. The Indian In the next two lessons, you will travel princes, however, were allowed to rule further on the road to freedom.     Words to know Dutch the people of “The Netherlands’, a small country in Europe indigo a plant from which a blue-coloured dye is made sepoys Indian soldiers serving in the British army in India; the English East India Company used them to conquer India Traders from many European countries came to India. They traded in spices, textiles and precious metals. They made huge profits. The English East India Company became very powerful. It began to conquer India little by little. The British exploited the people. Farmers, weavers, rulers, sepoys — all were unhappy with the policies of the British. A major revolt broke out in 1857. It spread to large parts of northern India and some parts of central India. The sepoys played the main role in it. The British suppressed the Revolt of 1857. Thereafter, the administration of India was taken over by the Government of England. 85

86     O1   ee Selected Response questions; Constructed Response questions a. elephants and horses. ___— c. guns and bullets. a i a ed Tick (/) the correct answers.   The main items bought by the foreign traders were b. spices and textiles. ee d. shoes and belts. — The cheaper cloth imported from England made the Indian weavers a. rich. a c. prosperous. — b. powerful. ee d. poor. ee The Revolt of 1857 started from a. Jhansi. ee c. Meerut. — b. Lucknow. ee d. Gwalior. a Bahadur Shah Zafar was the last of the a. Khalljis. oe c. Surs. — b. Mughals. — d. Lodis. — The rule of the English East India Company ended a. after the Revolt. — c. 50 years after the Revolt. — b. before the Revolt. a d. 100 years after the Revolt. —_ The words in bold are incorrect. Write the correct words. . The British forced the Indian farmers to grow cotton and rice. The Company's army consisted of Indian soldiers called hridoy. The Revolt of 1857 broke out in the month of March. The Revolt of 1857 remained limited to South India. India attained freedom seventy years after the Revolt of 1857. _ Complete the table.   _ Bareilly | Begum Hazrat Mahal Jhansi | Nana Sahib — Tantia Tope    i | Delhi Nana Sahib Rani Lakshmi Bai ee ae     

